\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@setfilename rc.d.info
@settitle rc.d
@afourpaper
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@finalout
@c %**end of header

@set PREFIX £{USR}
@set LIBEXEC £{LIBEXEC}


@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2013 Mattias Andrée

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts. A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top rc.d -- Daemon process control station
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@titlepage
@title rc.d
@subtitle Daemon process control station
@author by Mattias Andrée (maandree)

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents



@menu
* Overview::                        Brief overview of @command{rc.d}.
* Controlling a daemon::            Controlling one or more daemons.
* Reserved actions::                Using the reserved actions.
* Filters::                         Using filters to select daemons.
* GNU Free Documentation License::  Copying and sharing this manual.
@end menu



@node Overview
@chapter Overview

@command{rc.d} is a program that lets you control daemon processes @footnote{Also
called services.}. You can start, stop and restart daemons as well as signal them
to reload their configurations and show their status.



@node Controlling a daemon
@chapter Controlling a daemon

Daemons are controlled by individual scripts located in @file{@value{PREFIX}@value{LIBEXEC}/rc.d/}, that
are controlled collectively by @command{rc.d}. The scripts are free to implement
any command, called actions, except @code{list} and @code{help} which are reserved.

There a three standard commands:

@table @code
@item start
Start a daemon if it is not already running.
@item stop
Stop a daemon if it running.
@item restart
Restart a running daemon.
@item reload
Signal a daemon to reload its configurations.
@item status
Show the status of a daemon.
@end table

@code{reload} and @code{status} are less common.

If you, for example, wish to restart the daemon @code{cupsd}, run the command
@command{rc.d restart cupsd}, or if you want to start both @code{fancontrol}
and @code{cpupower}: @command{rc.d start fancontrol cpupower}.



@node Reserved actions
@chapter Reserved actions

Their are to reserved actions: @code{list} and @code{help}, @command{rc.d help}
is simple a command to get a quick help on how to use @command{rc.d}. To list
available daemons you use the action @code{list} by running @command{rc.d list}.
@code{list} will additionally show whether the daemons are started or stopped as
well as whether they were automatically stated or manually started.

When using @code{list} you can limit the listed daemons to a specify set of
daemons by appending them as individual arguments. Note that it will fail if
a daemon does not have an executable rc.d script.



@node Filters
@chapter Filters

When using actions, other than @code{help}, you can use four filters to select
daemons: @code{--started}, @code{--stopped}, @code{--auto} and @code{--noauto}.
In addition to these filters you can list daemons, when doing so you tell
@command{rc.d} that you only want those daemons but only those of them that the
used filters would select.

@table @code
@item -s
@itemx --started
Select or filter to only started daemons.
@item -S
@itemx --stopped
Select or filter to only stopped daemons.
@item -a
@itemx --auto
Select or filter to only automatically started daemons.
@item -A
@itemx --noauto
Select or filter to only manually started daemons.
@end table

So, for example, if you want to stop all manually started daemons that are
running you use the command @command{rc.d stop --started --noauto}.
If you want to restart @command{crond} only if it is stopped you use the
command @command{rc.d restart --stopped crond}.



@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texinfo

@bye

